[DOC] Update metrics query doc with more examples (#4128)
grafana/tempo: docs/sources/tempo/traceql/metrics-queries/functions.md

---
title: TraceQL metrics functions
menuTitle: TraceQL metrics functions
description: Learn about functions used in TraceQL metrics queries
weight: 600
keywords:
  - metrics query
  - TraceQL metrics
---

# TraceQL metrics functions

<!-- If you add a new function to this page, make sure you also add it to the _index.md/functions section.-->

TraceQL supports include `rate`, `count_over_time`, `quantile_over_time`, `histogram_over_time`, and `compare` functions.

## Available functions

These functions can be added as an operator at the end of any TraceQL query.

`rate`
: Calculates the number of matching spans per second

`count_over_time`
: Counts the number of matching spans per time interval (see the [`step` API parameter](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/api_docs/#traceql-metrics))

`min_over_time`

> : Returns the minimum value of matching spans values per time interval (see the `step` API parameter)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: Returns the minimum value for the specified attribute across all matching spans per time interval (see the `step` API parameter)
```

Reviewer: The same is true for max_over_time. Its not the minimum value of spans, its the minimum value of some specific attribute (the attribute is provided as an input parameter by the user) on all spans passed as input to the function.

Author: Thank you for this information. I've updated the max and min over time with your updates in a separate edit.

`compare`
: Used to split the stream of spans into two groups: a selection and a baseline. The function returns time-series for all attributes found on the spans to highlight the differences between the two groups.

## The `rate` function

The `rate` function calculates the number of matching spans per second that match the given span selectors.

### Parameters

> None.

Author: Are there any parameters for this?

Reviewer 2: nerp

## Examples

> The following query shows the rate of errors by service and span name. This is a TraceQL specific way of gathering rate metrics that would otherwise be generated by the span metrics processor. For example:

Author: i'm leaning towards putting the span metrics stuff on the main traceQL metrics page as a new section. When we get enough information we can break it out onto it's own page.

```
{ status = error } | rate() by (resource.service.name, name)
```

Is an equivalent to using span generated metrics and running the query:

> 

Author: Thank you for the clarification. In the text, we were actually missing an example. I've added yours in. We can ask someone to verify it.

This might let you determine that `/api/sad` had a higher rate of erroring
spans than `/api/happy`, for example.

## The `count_over_time` function

The `count_over_time()` let you counts the number of matching spans per time interval.
For more information, refer to the [`step` API parameter](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/api_docs/#traceql-metrics).

### Example

```
{ name = "GET /:endpoint" } | count_over_time() by (span.http.status_code)

```

## The `min_over_time` function

> The `min_over_time()` let you aggregate numerical values by computing the minimum value of them, such as the all important span duration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `min_over_time()` lets you aggregate numerical attributes by calculating their minimum value. For example, you could choose to calculate the minimum duration of a group of spans, or you could choose to calculate the minimum value of a custom attribute you've attached to your spans, like `span.shopping.cart.entries`. 
```

Reviewer: Maybe that's a crappy example.

Author: I think it's good to have an example. It's a start and we can iterate if we want to modify it later.

> For more information, refer to the [`step` API parameter](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/api_docs/#traceql-metrics).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The time interval that the minimum will be computed over is set by the `step` parameter. For more information, refer to the [`step` API parameter](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/api_docs/#traceql-metrics).
```

### Parameters

> None.

Author: Are there any parameters fro this?

Reviewer 2: i believe this takes a field name it's min-ing?

your examples below show this

Author: Done.

### Examples

```

> { name = "GET /:endpoint" } | min_over_time(duration) by (span.http.target)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{ name = "GET /:endpoint" } | min_over_time(duration) by (span.http.target)
This example computes the minimum duration for each `http.target` of all spans named `"GET /:endpoint"`
```

> { name = "GET /:endpoint" } | min_over_time(span.http.status_code)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{ name = "GET /:endpoint" } | min_over_time(span.http.status_code)
This example computes the minimum status code value of all spans named `"GET /:endpoint"`.
```

```

> ## The `max_over_time` function

Reviewer: Possibly could just combine with the above just like you did with the quantile_over_time and histogram_over_time functions. Alternatively if you want to keep them separate and you think my suggestions above are helpful, you can transfer them here. If not, no worries. :)

Author: I'll combine them like we did the other section.

Author: Done.

The `max_over_time()` let you aggregate numerical values by computing the maximum value of them, such as the all important span duration.
For more information, refer to the [`step` API parameter](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/api_docs/#traceql-metrics).

### Parameters

> None.

Author: Are there any parameters for this?

Reviewer 2: same as above

> { name = "GET /:endpoint" } | max_over_time(span.http.status_code)

Author: ```suggestion
{ name = "GET /:endpoint" } | max_over_time(span.http.status_code)
```

```

## The `quantile_over_time` and `histogram_over_time` functions

The `quantile_over_time()` and `histogram_over_time()` functions let you aggregate numerical values, such as the all important span duration.

> You can specify multiple quantiles in the same query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can specify multiple quantiles in the same query.

The example below computes the 99th, 90th, and 50th percentile of the duration attribute on all spans with name  `GET /:endpoint`. 
```

> { name = "GET /:endpoint" } | quantile_over_time(span.http.status_code, .99, .9, .5)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{ name = "GET /:endpoint" } | quantile_over_time(span.http.status_code, .99, .9, .5)
This computes the 99th, 90th, and 50th percentile of the values of the `status_code` attribute for all spans named `GET /:endpoint`. This is unlikely to tell you anything useful (what does a median status code of `347` mean?), but it works.
```

Reviewer: This may be not helpful. I think you could have a more contrived example like: "Imagine a custom attribute like `span.temperature`. You might want to know what the 50th percentile and 95th percentile temperatures were across all your spans." Even that may seem too nonsensical.

Author: Done. I've incorporated your example into the text.

```

## The `compare` function

> The `compare` function is used to split the stream of spans into two groups: a selection and a baseline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `compare` function is used to split a set of spans into two groups: a selection and a baseline.
```

It returns time-series for all attributes found on the spans to highlight the differences between the two groups.

> This is a powerful function that is best understood by looking at example outputs below.

Reviewer: You could also say this function powers the "Compare" tab in Explore Traces.

Reviewer: Honestly I think that's a better way to understand what it does. =)

Author: ```suggestion
This is a powerful function that is best understood by using the [**Compare** tab in Explore Traces](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFNA_VERSION>/explore/simplified-exploration/traces/investigate/#comparison). 
You can also under this function by looking at example outputs below.
```

Author: I've added a link to the Comparison tab in Explore Traces doc.

Author: Done.

> The function is used like other metrics functions: when it's placed after any search query, and converts it into a metrics query:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function is used like other metrics functions: when it's placed after any trace query, it converts the query into a metrics query:
```

I thought we have 'trace queries' and 'metrics queries' so suggesting this replacement.

`...any spanset pipeline... | compare({subset filters}, <topN>, <start timestamp>, <end timestamp>)`

Example:

```
{ resource.service.name="a" && span.http.path="/myapi" } | compare({status=error})
```

> This function is generally run as an instant query.

Author: Add explanation of an instant query.

> It may return may exceed gRPC payloads when run as a query range.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It may return may exceed gRPC payloads when run as a range query.
```
